.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii entbuff.8
.\"
.TH ENTBUFF 8 "April 2012" Linux "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
entbuff \- extend the kernel entropy buffer size via userspace
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B entbuff [-RWh] [-i
.I high-bit-count
.B ]
.B [-l
.I low-bit-count
.B ]
.B [-w
.I microseconds
.B ]
.B [-r
.I rand-path
.B ]
.B [-p
.I print-period
.B ]
.B [-b
.I buffer-size
.B ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B entbuff
polls the kernel entropy pool. When the kernel entropy pool has more than
.I high-bit-count
bits of entropy,
.B entbuff
extracts entropy from the kernel and stores it in an internal buffer. When
the kernel entropy pool has fewer than
.I low-bit-count
bits of entropy,
.B entbuff
moves entropy from its internal buffer back into the kernel entropy
pool. In this way,
.B entbuff
effectively increases the size of the kernel's entropy pool, which is
normally capped at 4096 bits.

.B entbuff
also periodically reports the current entropy count of its internal
buffer and of the kernel entropy pool.

.B entbuff
will not extract entropy from the kernel entropy pool if its internal
buffer is full.

Through all of this, a system running one or more copies of
.B entbuff
may be able to ride out brief period of high entropy demand, so long
as entropy is available in excess much of the rest of the time. As an
example, consider a system with an entropy source which will provide a few
hundred bytes of entropy per second on a system which normally consumes
only a few tens of bytes of entropy per second, but occasionally spikes
have it consume a few thousand bytes of entropy per second. If
.B entbuff
is running on such a system, it will help smooth out the spikes in
entropy drain.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-i, --high-thresh=BITS"
.B entbuff
will extract entropy from the kernel entropy pool only when the kernel
entropy pool contains at least
.I BITS
bits of entropy.
.IP "-l, --low-thresh=BITS"
.B entbuff
will feed entropy form the kernel only if the kernel entropy pool
containts fewer than
.I BITS
bits of entropy.
.IP "-w, --wait=MICROSECONDS"
.B entbuff
will wait
.I MICROSECONDS
microseconds between polling the kernel entropy pool's entropy level.
.IP "-r, --rand-path=PATH"
Use the file specified by
.I PATH
instead of the default file
.IR /dev/random .
.IP "-p, --print-period=MILLISECONDS"
Wait
.I MILLISECONDS
milliseconds between reports of entropy counts for the kernel and the
internal buffer.
.IP "-R, --log-reads"
In code paths related to extracting entropy from the kernel, write debug
traces to standard error.
.IP "-W, --log-writes"
In code paths related to inserting entropy into the kernel, write debug
traces to standard error.
.IP "-b, --buffer-size=BYTES"
Set the internal buffer size to
.I BYTES
bytes.
.IP "-h, --help"
Print options and usage information.
.SH FILES
.I /dev/random
.RS
The file
.BR entbuff (8)
will perform ioctls on, by default.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
No environment variables are paid particular attention by
.BR entbuff (8) .
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
All diagnostic messages are printed to standard error. All are immediately
followed by program termination.

Only a few of errors should technically be even possible, assuming there
are no bugs in
.BR entbuff ,
and if you see them, you should be able to resolve the problem locally
using the advice given here:

.RE
Error: EPERM error while adding entropy to kernel.
.RS
.B entbuff
was not run with appropriate permissions to add entropy to the
kernel's entropy pool. Run the program again with the correct
permissions. Generally, root, though if the system is compiled to use
fine-grained privileges, you need the CAPS_ADMIN capability. If the
'root' account doesn't have this privilege, check your security policy
configurations and run
.B entbuff
as a user which has those capabilities.

.RE
Error: high threshold(%i) must be greater than low threshold(%i)
.RS
You passed in arguments for the high and/or low thresholds which
conflict. The thresholds must be different, or
.B entbuff
wouldn't have a range to operate within; short of discarding entropy,
it tries as very hard to keep the system entropy level between those
two points. If those two points are the same, then there's no "between"
to target.

If you passed an argument for one, but not the other, try passing an
argument for both; the culprit may be the default value for the threshold
you didn't set.

.RE
Error: high threshold must be greater than 0.
.RE
Error: low threshold must be greater than 0.
.RE
Error: high threshold must be a multiple of eight.
.RE
Error: low threshold must be a multiple of eight.
.RS
Threshold settings must be greater than 0. A low threshold of 0 would mean
.B entbuff
itself would be constantly driving the system into entropy starvation,
and a high threshold of 0 would mean the low and high thresholds would
either have to be equal or inverted related to each other, and that
carries its own problems. (See above)

Threshold settings must be multiples of 8 for internal reasons. The
kernel's entropy pool is measured in bits, but it's far simpler for us
to transfer and account for things in counts of bytes. So to reduce the
potential for coding errors and user confusion, we require these values
to be multiples of 8.

.RE
Error: wait time must be greater than 0.
.RE
Error: print period must be greater than 0.
.RS
Since these values affect how long
.BR entbuff 's
internal loops sleep, they must be greater than 0. If they were allowed to be 0,
.B entbuff
would peg a CPU.

.RE
Error: buffer size must be greater than 0.
.RS
.BR entbuff 's
internal buffer size must be greater than zero, or it's not able to buffer
any entropy. If you only want to monitor the kernel's entropy level, use
.BR entwatch (1)
instead.

.RE
Error: Failed to allocate memory for entropy buffer
.RS
The most likely cause for this error is that you requested a larger
buffer than there is available RAM to service. Use the
.B -b
parameter to request a smaller buffer.

.RE
Error: Unable to open %s for r/w: %s
.RS
This error will be hit when
.B entbuff
attempts to open the random file (either the default
.IR /dev/random ,
or the file directed on the command line), and fails. The cause will
be included; it will most likely be either a permissions issue or a
"file not found" circumstance.

.SH FAILURES
The following errors should not happen unless there is something
critically wrong, such as compiling with the wrong version of kernel
headers available, compiling with a compiler incompatible with the kernel,
corruption of the program, or simply some absolutely critical bug.

Please notify the authors if you see any of these errors. Include what's
known about the compiler used to build the program, the compiler used
to build the kernel, the version of
.BR entbuff ,
the version of the kernel, the version of the kernel headers built
against, the version of the system libc and anything known about the
build environment.

Including the binary itself would be helpful, too.

.RE
Error: EINVAL error while adding entropy to kernel.
.RE
Error: EFAULT error while adding entropy to kernel.
.RE
Error: Failure closing random device
.RE
Error: Unexpected failure while preparing to feed entropy to kernel
.RE
Error: Sleep interrupted
.RE
Warning: failed to register free_entropy_buffer with atexit()
.RE
Warning: failed to register close_fdRandom with atexit()
.RE
BUG: timespec pointer NULL.
.RE
BUG: OVERFLOWED BUFFER!
.RE
BUG: Write would overflow buffer!
.RE
BUG: Write pos already past end of buffer!
.RE
BUG: Random device fd null
.RE
BUG: free_entropy_buffer called on NULL entropy buffer.
.RE
BUG: Would read outside buffer!
.RE
BUG: Read pos already outside buffer!
.RE
BUG: Read pos reached past end of buffer!
.RE
BUG: Missed case in buffer accounting!
.RE
Error: Unknown error while adding entropy to kernel.
.RE
Error: Failed ioctl call: %s
.SH BUGS

We could test for the ability to add entropy to the entropy pool before
extracting an appreciable amount.

.SH AUTHOR
Michael Mol <mikemol at gmail dot com>

(And more; see AUTHORS file)
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR entwatch (1),
.BR /usr/src/linux/drivers/char/random.c
